docs: add explanation for cryptography (#5478)
canonical/snapcraft: docs/explanation/cryptography.rst

.. _explanation_cryptographic-technology:

Cryptographic technology in Snapcraft
=====================================

Snapcraft uses cryptographic technologies to fetch arbitrary files over the internet,
communicate with local processes, and store credentials. It does not directly implement
its own cryptography, but it does depend on external libraries to do so.

When building snaps, Snapcraft uses different codebases and libraries depending on
the :ref:`base snap <base-snaps>`. This means that the cryptographic techonology used

> depends on the base snap.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

core24 and newer
----------------

> Snaps using core24 or newer as their base snap depend on Craft Application to build. For

Reviewer: What do you think about:

```suggestion
Snaps using core24 or newer as their base depend on Craft Application to build. For
```

We could also link to the bases explanation.

Author: I have a link to the bases reference in a previous section. Do you think I should swap that out for the explanation?  

I'm not sure if I like the idea of nearby inline links to reference and explanation of the same subject.  I would be fine with a "For an explanation of base, see ..." link.

Reviewer: Let's leave it as-is. The reference should be fine.

> more information, see the  `Craft Application cryptography`_ documentation.

Reviewer: I agree, I think it would help to know the scale of the cryptographic machinery before the link is provided.

> more information, see the  `Craft Application cryptography`_ documentation.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

> more information, see the  `Craft Application cryptography`_ documentation.

Author: I added more context to this paragraph.  https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Downloading build dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:ref:`Plugins <plugins>` use build tools to download and verify build dependencies. Some
plugins can provision their own build tools, while others require the build tools to be

> available on the system

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

For more information on the use of cryptography for plugins provided by Craft Parts, see
the `Craft Parts cryptography`_ documentation.

> For plugins provided by Snapcraft, the table below summarizes how plugins provision
> build tools and which build tools are used to download and verify dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For plugins provided by Snapcraft, the table below summarizes how they provision
build tools, and which build tools they use to download and verify dependencies.
```

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Plugin
    - Build tools used

>     - Method of provisioning the build tools

Reviewer: Great use of a table!

  * - :ref:`Colcon <reference_colcon_plugin>`
    - ``colcon`` and ``rosdep``

>     - not provisioned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Not provisioned
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

  * - Conda
    - ``conda``
    - Requests library and `curl`_

  * - Flutter
    - ``flutter``
    - Git

  * - :ref:`Matter SDK <reference_matter_sdk_plugin>`
    - ``matter``
    - Git

core22
------

Snaps using core22 as their base snap depend on various craft libraries to build.

> Snapcraft's cryptographic functionality with these libraries is described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

> Snapcraft's cryptographic functionality with these libraries is described below.

Reviewer: In my review I suggested we cut this second line.

> Snapcraft's cryptographic functionality with these libraries is described below.

Author: Fixed the first line, cut the second. https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Public key signing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft supports the adding and verification of arbitrary package repositories. For
more information, see the `Craft Archives cryptography`_ documentation.

The parts system
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft makes use of *parts* in project files for declarative builds. Parts specified

> by the user may download arbitrary files, install packages, and more. For more

Reviewer: It's safer to avoid "and more" in security docs. Maybe "and modify files in the snap filesystem"?

Author: I adjusted your suggestion, let me know what you think.

information, see the `Craft Parts cryptography`_ documentation.

Creating virtual build environments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft instantiates and executes builds on self-allocated virtual instances. For more

> information, see `Craft Providers cryptography`_ documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
information, see the `Craft Providers cryptography`_ documentation.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Downloading build dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Snaps using core22 have the same plugin support as core24. See the core24 section above

Reviewer 2: Is it possible for this to link to that header above? Just a nice-to-have, it's fine if not

Reviewer: It's definitely possible.

Author: Linked. https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

> Snaps using core22 have the same plugin support as core24. See the core24 section above

Reviewer: Let's avoid relative spatial directions for the docs themselves. They don't count for much if the reader is blind or has low vision.

```suggestion
Snaps using core22 have the same plugin support as core24. See the core24 section
```

Author: Go to know. https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

for more information on how Snapcraft downloads and verifies build dependencies.

core20
------

> Snaps using core20 as their base snap depend on various craft libraries to build.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

> Snaps using core20 as their base snap depend on various craft libraries to build.

Reviewer 2: Looks like this tweak was missed - JJ had you modify the core22 section, but the core20 section also has this wording to be changed.

> Snaps using core20 as their base snap depend on various craft libraries to build.

Reviewer: Fixed. caf9db3

> Snapcraft's cryptographic functionality with these libraries is described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Creating virtual build environments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Snapcraft instantiates and executes builds on self-allocated virtual instances. It uses

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Snapcraft instantiates and builds snaps on self-allocated virtual instances. It uses
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

the `Requests`_ library to install Multipass on Windows. Build environments for other

> operating systems handled with snapd, as described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operating systems are handled by snapd.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Communication with snapd
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft uses the Requests library to communicate over Unix sockets with the local

> `snap daemon (snapd)`_. These requests are used to fetch information about required

Reviewer: The first instance of snapd was earlier than this, so it should have earned the alias.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

> `snap daemon (snapd)`_. These requests are used to fetch information about required

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

software. If the software is missing, Snapcraft will install it through snapd. This
is done by querying the `snapd API`_ with URLs built dynamically and sanitized by
`urllib`_.

Sources
~~~~~~~

Downloading repositories
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> When a part sources a remote repository, Snapcraft uses the appropriate version control
> tool to clone the repository. The protocol used, such as ``SSH`` or ``HTTPS``, depends
> on the source URL and support from the tool.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a part sources a remote repository, Snapcraft clones the repository with the
appropriate version control tool. The protocol used, such as ``SSH`` or ``HTTPS``,
depends on the source URL and support from the version control tool.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Version control system
    - Tool used

  * - `Git`_
    - ``git``

  * - `Bazaar`_
    - ``bzr``

  * - `Mercurial`_
    - ``hg``

  * - `Subversion`_
    - ``svn```

Downloading source files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When a part sources a ``.deb``, ``.rpm``, ``.snap``, ``.tar``, ``.zip``, ``.7z``, or an
executable file, Snapcraft calls the Requests library to download it.

> The integrity of these files can be verified using a :ref:`checksum <source_checksum>`.

Reviewer: We should describe the circumstances for the verification, even if it's by user selection.

Author: Updated https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

The checksum is verified using hashlib, so all `algorithms available to the hashlib
library <https://docs.python.org/3/library/hashlib.html#hashlib.algorithms_available>`_
can be used.

Dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Downloading system packages
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> System dependencies are downloaded and verified using snapd and `Apt`_.

Author: Oop, this will take me a few times to remember. https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Downloading build dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Plugins use build tools to download and verify build dependencies. Some plugins can
provision their own build tools, while others require the build tools to be available on
the system. The table below summarizes how plugins provision build tools and which build
tools are used to download and verify dependencies.

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Plugin
    - Build tools used
    - Method of provisioning the build tools

  * - :ref:`Rust <craft_parts_rust_plugin>`
    - `Cargo <https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/cargo/>`_
    - `rustup <https://rustup.rs>`_

  * - Catkin
    - ``catkin`` and ``rosdep``

>     - not provisioned

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Not provisioned
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

  * - :ref:`Colcon <reference_colcon_plugin>`
    - ``colcon`` and ``rosdep``
    - not provisioned

  * - Conda
    - ``conda``
    - Requests library and curl

  * - Crystal
    - ``shards``
    - `Crystal snap`_

  * - :ref:`Go <craft_parts_go_plugin>`
    - `Go toolchain <https://go.dev/ref/mod>`_
    - not provisioned

  * - :ref:`Meson <craft_parts_meson_plugin>`
    - `Meson <https://mesonbuild.com>`_
    - not provisioned

  * - :ref:`NPM <craft_parts_npm_plugin>`
    - `npm <https://www.npmjs.com/>`_
    - Requests library and curl

  * - :ref:`Python <craft_parts_python_plugin>`
    - `pip <https://pip.pypa.io>`_
    - not provisioned

Public key signing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft uses cryptographic processes to parse public keys and optionally retrieve them
from remote servers. It does not directly implement its own cryptography, but depends on
`GNU Privacy Guard (GPG)`_ to do so.

A declaration of a package repository includes a mandatory ``key-id`` field that
specifies the fingerprint of the repository's public key. This public key can either be
stored locally or automatically fetched by Snapcraft.

> If the key file is located as part of the project's assets, Snapcraft uses the GPG as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the key file is located as part of the project's assets, Snapcraft uses GPG as
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

> If the key file is located as part of the project's assets, Snapcraft uses the GPG as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the key file is located as part of the project's assets, Snapcraft uses GPG as
```

provided by the official Ubuntu archives to ensure that the file matches the declared
fingerprint. If the key file is not present locally, Snapcraft uses GPG in conjunction
with `dirmngr`_ (also from the Ubuntu archives) to fetch the key from the OpenPGP

> keyserver ``keyserver.ubuntu.com``.

Reviewer: Maybe?

```suggestion
keyserver at https://keyserver.ubuntu.com.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

In either scenario, Snapcraft then creates an APT data source for the package repository

> referencing the identified key. It does not validate that the remote repository is in
> fact signed by the key, as APT itself does it as part of its normal operation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
referencing the identified key. It does not validate that the remote repository is
signed with the key, as APT does this as part of its normal operation.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Remote building
---------------

> Snapcraft's remote build uses Craft Application. The cryptographic functionality used
> for remote builds is described in the  `Craft Application cryptography`_ documentation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Remote snap builds use Craft Application. The cryptographic functionality used
for remote builds is described in the  `Craft Application cryptography`_ documentation.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Snapcraft's legacy remote builder uses `launchpadlib`_ to interact with the `Launchpad`_
API and trigger remote builds. Login credentials for Launchpad are stored in a plain
text file in the XDG data directory.

Interaction with storefronts
----------------------------

> Snapcraft is able to interface with the Snap store and private stores over the internet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Snapcraft is able to interface with the Snap Store and private stores over the internet.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

> Snapcraft is able to interface with the Snap store and private stores over the internet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Snapcraft interfaces with the Snap Store and private stores over the internet.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Some store interactions are driven through Craft Store. For more information, see the

> `Craft Store cryptography`_ documentation.

Reviewer 3: > Some store interactions

Can we give one or two examples of these interactions?

Author: I added two (there aren't many to choose from!) https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

> Other interactions with the store don't use Craft Store. For these interactions,
> Snapcraft uses cryptographic processes to send files between devices and endpoints
> through the internet. It does not directly implement its own cryptography, but it does
> depend on external libraries to do so.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For interactions that don't use Craft Store,
Snapcraft uses cryptographic processes to send files between devices and endpoints
through the internet. It does not directly implement its own cryptography, but it does
depend on external libraries to do so.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Authentication
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft uses `macaroons`_, as an authentication mechanism, which are processed by the
`macaroonbakery`_ library. This library validates and manages macaroons as returned by
stores and simplifies the inclusion of macaroons in further requests to stores.

Credentials may additionally be stored on-disk using the `keyring`_ library, which
will use the keyring service provided by the host operating system. If the host does
not have a keyring service, they will instead be stored in a plain text file called
:file:`credentials.json` under the application's data storage directory. A warning is
issued to the terminal when this behavior is triggered. This behavior is available to
ease the usage of Snapcraft inside virtual machines and containers, but is generally
discouraged.

Network connectivity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Snapcraft handles URLs using `urllib`_. The use of this library both simplifies and
> hardens the parsing of URLs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Snapcraft uses `urllib`_ to simplify and harden the parsing
of URLs.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1

Connections over the internet are mediated by the Requests or `httpx`_ libraries.
libraries. These libraries handle cryptographic operations such as the TLS handshake
that are standard requirements for modern internet connections. These are configured to
always attempt HTTPS connections first, but have the ability to communicate over HTTP as

> a fallback. The Snap store does not support HTTP, but this capability is retained to aid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a fallback. The Snap Store does not support HTTP, but this capability is retained to aid
```

> Connections over the internet are mediated by the Requests or `httpx`_ libraries.
> libraries. These libraries handle cryptographic operations such as the TLS handshake
> that are standard requirements for modern internet connections. These are configured to
> always attempt HTTPS connections first, but have the ability to communicate over HTTP as
> a fallback. The Snap store does not support HTTP, but this capability is retained to aid
> with local testing. Between these two libraries, Snapcraft will use whichever of the two
> is invoked by the consuming application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Connections over the internet are mediated by the Requests or `httpx`_ libraries.
libraries. These libraries handle cryptographic operations, such as the TLS handshake,
that are standard requirements for modern internet connections. They are configured to
always attempt HTTPS connections first, but have the ability to communicate over HTTP as
a fallback. The Snap Store does not support HTTP, but this capability is retained to aid
local testing. Between these two libraries, Snapcraft will use whichever of the two
is invoked by the consuming application.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5478/commits/b86011f1e4714e8ec77af1eac46208a99c354aa1
